Your Thursday Briefing: Ferguson, Janet Yellen, Kanye West


A Jeb Bush campaign event in Murrells Inlet, S.C., on Wednesday. Most of the Republican candidates are campaigning in the state. Randall Hill/Reuters
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’s what you need to know:

• The day in U.S. politics.

Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders square off tonight in a debate as the fight to win Nevada looms. The Clinton campaign is rethinking its strategy after its double-digit loss to Mr. Sanders in New Hampshire.

Here’s what to look for in the debate (9 p.m. Eastern, PBS, and streaming).

While Chris Christie and Carly Fiorina have dropped out of the race, the remaining Republican candidates are campaigning in South Carolina. Except for Donald J. Trump, that is, who is in Louisiana. Mr. Trump won twice on Tuesday night, our analyst says.

Marco Rubio is taking the blame for his poor showing in New Hampshire. We break down how a debate misstep may have jeopardized his campaign.

Colder with a snow shower

• Horror in Nigeria refugee camp.

A suicide bombing killed 58 people and wounded 78 at a refugee camp for people who have fled the militant group Boko Haram.

More than two million people have been driven from their homes in the group’s six-year insurgency.

• U.S. sues Ferguson, Mo.

The St. Louis suburb faces a civil rights lawsuit after it rejected a standing agreement with the Justice Department to fix its criminal justice system.

Council members said Ferguson — where a white police officer fatally shot an unarmed black 18-year-old, Michael Brown, in 2014 — couldn’t afford the overhaul plan.

A similar case in 2012 cost an Arizona county $5 million in legal fees.

• Oregon standoff nears end.

F.B.I. agents have encircled the last four armed occupiers of a national wildlife refuge in eastern Oregon. They say they’ll turn themselves in, but didn’t rule out firing at the agents if tear gas were used.

• Salvaging Syria’s talks.

Secretary of State John Kerry is in Munich today, trying to save the diplomatic talks in Syria. He’ll meet first with his Russian counterpart before attending a wider meeting of 20 regional and world powers.

Russia’s intervention has given President Bashar al-Assad of Syria and his allies momentum in Syria’s civil war.

NATO will deploy ships to the Aegean Sea in an attempt to stop smugglers moving migrants to Greece from Turkey, the alliance’s secretary general said today.

• Western White House.

President Obama will attend Democratic Party fund-raisers today in San Jose and Los Angeles, where he’ll also tape an appearance on “The Ellen DeGeneres Show.”

Mr. Obama is hosting leaders from 10 Southeast Asian nations for a summit meeting on Monday at Sunnylands, a lush estate in Rancho Mirage, Calif.

BUSINESS

• Morgan Stanley will pay $3.2 billion in a settlement with state and federal authorities over its creation of mortgage-backed bonds before the financial crisis.

• Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chairwoman, will speak before the Senate Banking Committee today.

In testimony before a House committee on Wednesday, she sounded more worried about the U.S. economy than at her previous public appearance, in December.

• Twitter’s user growth has stalled, and our tech columnist envisions a sunnier future for the social network as a private company or as a smaller division of a tech or media giant.

• HBO Now, the premium cable network’s stand-alone video streaming service, has attracted about 800,000 paying subscribers.

• U.S. stock markets are down more than one percent, amid today’s global plunge.

NOTEWORTHY

• Trial of former Nazi guard begins.

Reinhold Hanning, 94, is accused of being an accessory to the murder of 170,000 people in Auschwitz, Poland, from January 1943 to June 1944.

• New York Fashion Week.

Times fashion and music critics will be filing live updates from Kanye West’s show and album release (4 p.m. Eastern) today. Here are five designers to watch.

• Lifesaving measures.

Johns Hopkins Hospital says it’s ready to perform the first kidney and liver transplants between H.I.V.-positive donors and H.I.V.-positive patients in the U.S.

Separately, researchers say people with a high school education and healthier lifestyles are contributing to a decline in new cases of dementia.

• Headed to Broadway.

The screenwriter Aaron Sorkin will adapt “To Kill a Mockingbird” for the stage in the 2017-18 season. The novel, written by Harper Lee, has already won the Pulitzer Prize and an Academy Award for its film adaptation.

Disney is planning a musical adaptation of “Frozen” for the spring of 2018.

• Unpublished Black History.

Catch up with our monthlong dive into The Times’s archives.

Among the subjects: Arthur Ashe, James Baldwin, Jesse Jackson, Thurgood Marshall, and Jackie Robinson.

• For Shakespeare devotees.

The 400th anniversary of Shakespeare’s death will be honored with numerous events today and will continue all year in Stratford-upon-Avon, England, and London.

• For dinner.

A recipe for panzanella with winter squash is our recommendation for tonight.

BACK STORY

About six million pilgrims, many of them seeking to be healed of disease and pain, visit Lourdes, the site of the most popular Roman Catholic shrine in France, each year.


Marie-Bernarde Soubirous said she saw the Virgin Mary appear in a grotto in Lourdes on this day in 1858.
It’s where the 14-year-old Marie-Bernarde Soubirous, later canonized as St. Bernadette, said she saw the Virgin Mary appear in a grotto on this day in 1858.

Today is the Feast of Our Lady of Lourdes (a reference to the Virgin Mary) and the World Day of the Sick, a moment to focus on health care and human dignity.

Pope John Paul II came up with the idea of a day for the ailing after learning that he had Parkinson’s disease. He traveled to Lourdes on his final foreign trip, in 2004, less than a year before he died.

Pope Benedict XVI, acknowledging his own frailty, used this day to announce his retirement in 2013.

The church has recognized 69 miracles and thousands of cures at Lourdes, a small city in the foothills of the Pyrenees. The faithful say that the waters of its grotto have healing powers.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.