5 Arrested in Connection With East Village Gas Explosion


The Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus Vance Jr., said on Thursday that the East Village explosion was the direct result of a landlord hungry to cash in on soaring rents at the expense of ensuring residents’ safety. Sam Hodgson for The New York Times
The police arrested five people and charged four of them with involuntary manslaughter on Thursday in connection with a deadly gas explosion that rocked the East Village in Manhattan last spring, killing two men, injuring scores more and forcing hundreds of people from their homes.

The powerful blast at 121 Second Avenue in March reduced three buildings to rubble, raised concerns about the state of New York City’s aging infrastructure and highlighted the problems of people possibly tapping into gas lines in ways that could be dangerous.

Speaking at a news conference, the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus Vance Jr., said that with construction taking place across the city at a “breakneck speed” the “financial incentives to take shortcuts has never been stronger.”

The deadly East Village explosion, he said, was the direct result of a landlord hungry to cash in on soaring rents at the expense of doing the proper work to ensure the safety of both the residents in the building and the surrounding neighborhood.

Mayor Bill de Blasio, in a statement, said the defendants “showed a blatant and callous disregard for human life.”

“We are heartened that today these defendants will be brought to justice and forced to answer for their criminal actions,” he said.

The four people charged with involuntary manslaughter are Dilber Kukic, a contractor; Athanasios Ioannidis, an unlicensed plumber; Maria Hrynenko, the owner of the building; and her son, Michael Hrynenko Jr.

The fifth person taken into custody, Andrew Trombettas, faced lesser charges for supplying his master license to Mr. Ioannidis.

In court documents and at the news conference, prosecutors outlined a scheme by all five of the defendants to illegally tap into a gas line meant for a ground-floor restaurant, on more than one occasion, and use it to supply recently renovated apartments in the floors above — where the average rent was $6,000 per month.

Mr. Vance said that Mr. Kukic was hired by the building’s owner to renovate the apartments in the six-story building in 2013. The work was completed in 2014 but the utility company Consolidated Edison did not approve the gas lines for the apartments.

The defendants, according to prosecutors, decided to create their own illegal gas link.

In August 2014, Con Edison workers responding to calls from people smelling gas visited the property and discovered that a utility line intended only for the ground-floor restaurant, Sushi Park, had been tapped to provide gas to the residential apartments.

Con Edison shut off all gas to that building on Aug. 6 and restored the service on Aug. 15, after the landlord had taken away the tapping apparatus.

However, according to prosecutors, the defendants devised a way to continue to illegally tap into the gas line of the neighboring building, 119 Second Avenue, which was also owned by Ms. Hrynenko, to feed the apartments.

“The defendants constructed another illegal unsafe gas delivery system by installing a series of pipes and valves connecting the apartments in 121 Second Avenue to an uncapped, commercial-grade gas meter in the adjacent, vacant property,” according to the indictment.



A gas explosion last March caused three buildings on Second Avenue in Manhattan to collapse. Robert Stolarik for The New York Times
The system was set up in the back of the building’s basement — behind locked doors, hidden from Con Edison, tenants and other workers.

On the day of the explosion, Con Edison inspectors had returned to the building for an inspection and found fault with plumbing work in the basement but no signs of leaking gas.

After the inspectors left, according to law enforcement officials, Mr. Kukic and Mr. Hrynenko turned the gas back on. However, they did not know that valves opened during a pressure test by Con Edison were never closed.

About a half-hour after they left, the manager of the restaurant called Ms. Hrynenko, saying he smelled gas.

Soon after he made that call, the explosion rocked the neighborhood and fire raged through the East Village neighborhood. Residents jumped from fire escapes and made desperate attempts to help one another get to safety. Two people inside the sushi restaurant were killed: Moises Ismael Locon Yac, 27, a busboy, and Nicholas Figueroa, 23, who had been on a lunch date.

The fire commissioner, Daniel A. Nigro, said that the tragedy was nearly even worse and that scores of firefighters narrowly avoided losing their lives as the fire raged and the structure collapsed.

“When greed guides the decisions and respect for human life doesn’t, this is the result,” he said.

Lawyers for the defendants, who were expected to be arraigned later Thursday, could not be immediately reached for comment.

Ms. Hrynenko inherited the building from her husband, Michael, who had been the owner of the well-known Kiev diner before his death in 2004.

After the explosion, as investigators focused on the actions of the landlord, a lawyer for Ms. Hrynenko said that Con Edison bore responsibility for not shutting off the gas during the visit to the property earlier that day.

“Maria would not have sent her son in there if she knew the building was going to explode,” the lawyer, Thomas M. Curtis, said last spring.

“I think Con Ed is really culpable here for not shutting off the gas,” the lawyer said. “They could have shut off the main valve.”